# Cost-of-Living-Dashboard
Uses Data from Missouri Economic Research and Information Center to display relative affordability indices between American States. 

# Data Source
I found the dataset on Kaggle under the name “Cost of living by State in USA - MERIC“  published by Karol Łukaszczyk. The link to the data is https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/lukkardata/cost-of-living-missouri-economic-research?resource=download.  This data was originally compiled by the Missouri Economic Research and Information Center (MERIC).  The updated data can be accessed at https://meric.mo.gov/data/cost-living-data-series. 
# Cleaning
I removed rows with states that I decided not to use, which included two Canadian provinces, Puerto Rico, and all data with missing labels. Next, I had to recalculate the rank based on the remaining states. Finally, I renamed one column to make it easier to understand.

A single row of the data represents the price indexes for a state in each of 6 categories, as well as a composite index (Total Index), which is a weighted average of the individual categories. Each index is created in reference to other states, with 100 being the average value in each category. The rank column refers to the comparative Total Index value of the state, with “1” referring to the most affordable state. This data only covers the price index as calculated in the first quarter of 2023.
# Dashboard Explanation
The main question that my app investigates is how American states compare on affordability and cost of living. With high inflation over the past several years, this metric is important for many Americans. This dashboard can be used by anyone interested in the American economy, but it has a specific use case for individuals considering relocation. For example, a new job offer in Hawaii, even if it pays a high salary, may not be worth it when considering the cost of maintaining one's current standard of living. Likewise, people who are more interested in a specific category, such as housing, can use my app to learn about housing costs. Ideally, this dashboard can be used alongside other quality-of-life data for users to make an informed decision about which state is a better place to live in. This dashboard also provides a comparison between the relative price categories for economic/policy-focused users to use for understanding the relationships between these factors. 

The most important interactive element on this dashboard is the map. This feature lets people see, through the color scale and hover feature, how states compare with each other on different cost-of-living metrics. The map defaults to considering Total Index, but can also be used for any of the other metrics. The map can show which regions are more and less expensive, with the West Coast and the North-East being the most expensive. 

The Scatter Plot, with alterable x and y axes, lets viewers visualize the trend between any two Index values. While, as expected, the majority of the correlations are positive, the smooth line overlay helps people see the trend more clearly, and the tooltips feature allows people to hover over and see which state is represented by which point. This is especially useful for outlier points.

The Average Price Index radar chart deepens the viewer's understanding of how different factors contribute to the Total Index, and shows if any category has a significantly higher or lower price. When all states are selected (as they are by default), the radar chart gives all the averages at around 100 (not exactly 100 due to filtering). When one state is selected, the radar chart provides all of the cost indices, visualizing the relative costs of different purchases in the state.

The main goal for the interface layout and customizations is for the dashboard to be readable and intuitive. Readability is achieved by using the Virdis Color Scale, which is both aesthetic and color-blind friendly. Likewise, tooltips limit the number of labels to avoid overwhelming the viewer.  To make my dashboard intuitive, all of the titles are clear (and/or dynamic), and the same selector is used to select the x-axis of the Plot Chart, as well as the Price Index Map.

One unexpected finding in my data is that, when excluding the eight most expensive states, there is no correlation between transportation and utility costs. Logically, utility and transportation are both uses of energy; it would seem that a higher cost for inputs (oil/gas) would cause both utility and transportation to increase in price. Thanks to this dashboard, we know there is no strong correlation and can start to investigate the reason.
